Interview 4: Fareed Zakaria GPS (CNN, Jan 2012):

My next guest is Daniel Kahneman and he will explain. He is the recipient of the Nobel Prize for Economics, but he is actually a psychologist. And he has a new book out, a terrific book, "Thinking, Fast and Slow."

Welcome. Professor, pleasure to have you on.

DANIEL KAHNEMAN, PHD, NOBEL LAUREATE IN ECONOMIC SCIENCES; AUTHOR OF "THINKING, FAST AND SLOW": Glad to be here.

ZAKARIA: So what struck me about that example is that it is a perfect example of why it's not a good idea to think fast. You know, you're convinced you're right and it's dead wrong. What is it that we're doing there that - that makes that happen?

KAHNEMAN: You know, there are two things. One is something that happens in your mind, it's the association. For some reason that problem brings $0.10 to mind. And the other thing is something that doesn't happen. You don't think and that's the key difference.

ZAKARIA: Right. If you wrote it out as an equation I found, you can't make a mistake.

KAHNEMAN: Then you don't make a mistake. But if people just check, they would know that $0.10 and another dollar that amounts to $1.20, so that's wrong. They don't check (ph).

And there are interesting differences between the people who check (ph) and the people who don't. And, you know, at Harvard, MIT or Princeton, half of the people, or a little over half in some cases make a mistake on that one. Other universities, you know, I have to stand up for Princeton, other universities it's worse.

ZAKARIA: But - but tell me this, is this a pattern that you - you detect in human behavior that there are some things that people think fast about and some things they think slow about? How would you describe this difference?

KAHNEMAN: Well, you know, most of the time we think fast. And most of the time we're really expert at what we're doing and most of the time what we do is right. And we do it with very little work and very little effort.

Now, there is slow thinking, it's effortful, it's hard work. And it turns out that by and large we clearly - most people are wired to avoid it. We try to do as little as possible of the slow thinking. It's very hard work.

And so sometimes when, you know, the fast thinking delivers the wrong suggestion and the slow thinking doesn't block it, then people come out with mistakes.

ZAKARIA: My people have pointed out that racism is often the, you know, a kind of a product of that kind of very quick thinking. That prejudice comes to mind very quickly.

KAHNEMAN: Well, of course. I mean, you know, we have associations to things. We have, you know, we have associations to tables and to - and to dogs and to cats and to Harvard professors and that's the way the mind works. It's an association machine.

ZAKARIA: When you think about this, does it make you feel that the way in which economics is done, the way we think about economics is all wrong? Because there is a sense in which what you're describing is - is the human capacity to really make false judgments all the time, so to not know what is in your best rational self-interest.

KAHNEMAN: The idea that people are completely rational it really entails something very important, which is that the - that the government has the responsibility to ensure disclosure. That people are given correct information when they interact in the market.

But it doesn't matter for a rational agent whether the print is small or large. It matters a lot for people with a lazy sort of system, too, lazy, slow thinking. They don't read the small print. None of us read, you know, those things that flash on the computer screen and that you say I agree at the end.

And that is a place where behavior economics is making an important contribution and I think a correction to the old, classical economic model of the rational agent.

ZAKARIA: The sort of classic example of what you're saying is that you - you give people the default option to save rather than not to save. So that on their - on their, you know, salary forms you say check here if you want to opt out of the IRA or the savings plan so that the default is that they save and the result is you have many, many more people saving.

KAHNEMAN: Well, I mean, you know, one of the most dramatic examples of that is in Europe. They have about half of the country on organ donation have an opt-in form so that you have to check if you want to donate your organs, otherwise you don't default as you don't.

The other half, the default is, is you do donate and you have to check if you don't. And the percentage of donations is roughly I think 90 percent in one case and about 15 percent in the other.

ZAKARIA: Wow.

KAHNEMAN: So on very consequential decisions people can be guided by those really - I would think completely superficial aspects of the situation.

ZAKARIA: Do you think what this tells you is that the government should be more active in trying to shape people's choices? And what areas would you advocate more is done?

KAHNEMAN: Well, you know, I think this is something that is actually happening today, I mean, in the Obama White House because you have a behavior economist, Cass Sunstein, who is in charge of regulation. And the focus there is consumer protection.

It's making sure not only that things are disclosed, which everybody agrees, I mean that's the law, they have to be disclosed, but they are disclosed in a way that accommodates the code (ph) of limitations of people.

ZAKARIA: And you don't think it interferes with the good - the good functioning of a market.

KAHNEMAN: Well, you know, I mean, that nobody wants a world in which another government will decide what you eat. That's not what will prevent people from eating fat food. So there is a limit. There is a balance.

There is a balance between freedom, which everybody wants to protect and, you know, the need of individuals to be in some cases helped make decisions that they would want to have made. I mean it's not that you're forcing people into things they don't want.

In the case of saving, most people want to save more than they do. And they're grateful when you help them save more than they do. So that is the balance that, you know, they're seeking and it's a difficult balance to achieve.

ZAKARIA: When you first saw that baseball bat and ball question, did you get it wrong or right?

KAHNEMAN: Well, I think I got it right. But I'm, you know, I'm good at those things and I check, so -

ZAKARIA: Daniel Kahneman, pleasure to have you on.

KAHNEMAN: It was a pleasure to be here. Thank you.
